---
layout: blog_post
title: Start sending dates the right way (aka The ISO8601 101)
author: keithamus
---

We’ve all had those tough conversations on how best to exchange dates between 
two systems: “is DD-MM-YYYY good for everyone?” “what about YYYY/MM/DD” “we
could just use Epoch timestamps”...

Each option is rife with problems; some don’t convey enough info, some are too
ambiguous, and others are hard on the human eye. Compounding these difficulties
are the myriad of standards that work across different systems.

Luckily there is a solution, It is flexible, readable and unambiguous. ISO8601.

ISO8601 is simply the best standards to use. It can provide the maximum amount
of info reasonably required when interchanging dates between systems. It can
provide units all the way down to second decimals. It includes support for time
zones and strictly specifies the order of each date fragment, all while still 
being reasonably terse. It looks something like this:

    2012-05-04T12:20:34.000343+01:00

Let’s dissect ISO8601 at a deeper level and further prove why you should be 
using it.

### Strict ordering

ISO8601 defines the exact order at which the date should be represented, in a
system that is called “big endian” (smallest last). This means that the
biggest unit comes first, followed by the next, all the way down to the
smallest. It also says that the biggest unit needed is year, so ISO8601 dates
have to be ordered as `YYYY-MM-DD`, times have to be ordered to `HH:MM:SS`, 
followed by an optional second decimal. This is great because not only is this 
completely unambiguous (you’ll never confuse MM for DD again) but it also makes 
it very easy to read (everything is in its expected place). It just makes sense.

### Time zone support

It supports time zones, and it has a predefined way of doing so, like `+HH:MM`
(or `+HHMM`). Date formats like Seconds-from-Epoch just cannot convey this and 
so - as well as being completely unreadable - they are not as well suited as 
ISO8601.

Send as much or as little as you need

Inherently ISO says you can optionally send as much data as you want to, and it
still be a valid ISO string, so for example `YYYY` would be a valid ISO date, as
would `YYYY-MM`, `YYYY-MM-DDTHH`. You can supply the time zone, or omit it, up 
to you. You can only omit going down though, so a date like `MM-DD` isn’t valid,
because it is missing the year.

### The downsides

The upshot of this flexibility though, and one that is pretty much universally
missed by languages is that you can also do crazy stuff like provide seconds to
as many decimal places as you want. So a date like
`2009-09-09T09:09:09.00000000000000000009` is totally valid. ISO8601's biggest 
gain is also its biggest pain, which makes it very difficult to code a reliable 
parser for the standard. Some small but annoying quirks to look out for are:

Unlimited decimals allowed for seconds, The `T` separator between the date and
time can be pretty much anything time zone can be omitted, or Z, it can have a
`:` to separate hours from minutes, or not.

Of course all of this also means that different languages can and will do
different stuff with ISO8601. For example languages like Python and .NET will 
use 6 decimal places (microseconds) for seconds, while languages like PHP and
JavaScript will use 3. Python allows you to change the ‘T’ separator at your
whim, and also by default will omit any time zone data, not even add a Z,
meanwhile JavaScript and other languages will always use ‘T’ and if no time zone
data is present, will use `Z` for the time zone. See how this can get pretty
complex pretty quickly?

Luckily Tempus will mask most of this away for you (as of 0.2 at least!), so you
won’t need to worry about any of these problems.

### Intervals

An awesome but oft overlooked part of ISO8601 is intervals. For example you
are making a calendar, and you have a meeting that lasts 2 hours on it, with
ISO8601 intervals you can express this as a string format, rather than using
something ghastly like seconds or milliseconds:

    'P6Y4M4DT3H45M15S'

The nice thing about ISO intervals is that they are human readable, they are 
easy enough to parse, and they follow stricter standards. An ISO interval must
start with a `P`, standing for Period. From there it is simply a number, 
followed by a unit-like designator, for example months are M and days are D. To 
separate time from dates, use a `T` - just like ISO date times.

ISO intervals are just a fantastic way to express Date ranges, which is why the
[Intervals](/docs/module-intervals) module has been coded for just such a thing.

### Start using ISO8601 today

If you're sending dates across systems, there really is no excuse not to be
using ISO8601. Tempus will make it super easy. Try it and never revert to the
bad old ways.

If you're already using it, do you have any tips for readers? Are you still
hanging on to Epoch timestamps? Rant or rave about ISO8601 in the comments
below.